25 November 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Pretoria on 24 November 2010.Cabinet approved the tabling of the Report of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission before the Joint Standing Committee on Defence in Parliament. This report follows Cabinet s decision in 2009 to create a new service dispensation for the Defence Force. Following that decision, the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission was established to, amongst others, advise and make recommendations on a unique service dispensation outside the ambit of the Public Service. The report covers challenges faced by the SANDF since 1994, the root causes of the problems and proposed short and long term solutions.Cabinet approved the extension of the revised Non-Statutory Forces pension dispensation to cover all former Non-Statutory Forces members who entered into an employment contract with other government departments and institutions that contribute to the Government Employees Pension Fund. Cabinet further approved the alignment of the current Special Pension Act and Government Employees Pension Law to enable recognition of Non-Statutory Forces service of affected current and past employees.Cabinet noted the launch today of 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. The theme for this year is: Don t look away, act against abuse. While this campaign is built around 16 days of heightened messages and activities, Cabinet said the campaign should go on for 365 days in a year. Cabinet expressed concern about the increasing pattern of sexual violence against children in particular and the interconnectedness of substance abuse to violence against women and children.Cabinet called upon society in general, and men in particular, to step up efforts to stop all forms of abuse of women and children. Cabinet noted that December 1, 2010 will be the 22nd Commemoration of World Aids Day. The national event will be held at Gert Sibande District Municipality, in Mpumalanga, under the theme: We are responsible. Cabinet called on all South Africans to once more demonstrate collective responsibility in the fight against HIV and AIDS.Cabinet noted the six-month (April to September 2010) progress report on the Industrial Policy Action Plan (IPAP2) and approved the report be tabled in Parliament. The report highlights key achievements to date, encompasses progress and outputs with respect to the implementation of the four transversal interventions and 13 sector strategies outlined in 84 date-bound Key Actions Plans (KAP s) set out in the IPAP2 document. The report identifies constraints and challenges which may impede the implementation of the IPAP2 in the context of global and domestic economic trends. In addition, the IPAP2 will be refined and aligned with the new Growth Path for continued implementation in 2011.Cabinet noted the report by the inter-departmental task team (IDTT) on Iron Ore and Steel. In essence, the IDTT will be entering into negotiations with the relevant stakeholders in the Iron Ore and Steel industry with the objective of providing cost plus 3% access to the 21.4% Sishen Mining rights to Arcelor Mittal South Africa (AMSA) or other steel producers, conditional upon a developmental pricing model determined by Government that will result in domestic prices of steel being no higher than the lowest quartile of global prices. The team will draw upon a suite of policy instruments which have been presented to Cabinet. These include but are not limited to relevant sections of the Minerals Petroleum Resource Development Act (MPRDA); strengthening the Competition Act; amending shareholder compacts with State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs); and promoting new steel investments together with the prioritization of electricity availability and connections to such investments.Cabinet approved the proposed Pilot Curatorship and Emerging Farmer s Support Facility (EFSF) models for financially distressed farmers who are clients of the Land Bank, to protect their farms from being repossessed. The inter-ministerial committee will provide Cabinet with annual reports on progress (failure and success) of the Pilot Curatorship and EFSF models and if these models prove successful and an evaluation is performed, the relevant Ministers will explore the possibility of expanding the Curatorship and EFSF models on a wider scale in the agriculture sector.Cabinet approved the climate change negotiation position for the 16th session of the Conference of Parties (COP16) and the meeting of Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP6) to be held in Cancun, Mexico in December 2010.Cabinet approved the White Paper on South Africa s Foreign Policy for submission to Parliament and agreed that the White Paper should reflect South Africa s interests as they relate to South Africa s role in the global geopolitics. Once the parliamentary process has been finalised in this regard, the consolidated White Paper will be submitted to the Cabinet Committee on International Corporation, Trade and Security for further consideration.In fulfilling the lead role assigned to South Africa in the NEPAD Heads of State and Government Orientation Committee (HSGOC), Cabinet endorsed the proposed approach to ensure South Africa s maximization of the opportunity presented by the President s initiative. A Presidential Infrastructure Task Team, supported by a corresponding working group of Directors-General, will focus its work on ensuring South Africa s centrality in regional and continental infrastructure development, with emphasis on South Africa championing the North-South Corridor. A concentrated effort will be made to ensure that the interests of South Africa and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) are integrated into the African Union (AU) New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA).Cabinet noted the arms sales authorized by the National Conventional Arms Control (NCACC) over the period July to September 2010 and endorsed the arms transfer decisions taken by the NCACC as mandated by the provisions of the National Arms Control Act. Section 23 of the Act requires the NCACC to present to Cabinet and Parliament reports on South African arms transfers conducted and that such reports will be made public. Cabinet noted the successful establishment and functioning of the translation unit located in the Office of the Chief State Law Adviser. Since August 2010, 107 Bills were translated into ten official languages.Cabinet noted how the international community has once again shown confidence in the ability of South Africa to host major events by announcing the City of Johannesburg as host of the 2013 World Conference on Doping in Sport. The announcement was made by the World Anti-Doping Agency Board on Sunday, 21 November 2010. The conference will attract more than 3 000 delegates made up of sport policymakers, sport officials, academics and the media, amongst others.Cabinet approved the design changes to the following coins:Cabinet further approved the design of the commemorative R5 circulation coin in celebration of the 90th anniversary of the South African Reserve Bank.The following Bill was approvedNational Health Amendment Bill (for public comment)The Bill provides for the establishment of an independent entity referred to as the Office of the Health Standards Compliance whose primary purpose is to ensure that health establishments throughout the country comply with minimum standards. The body will advise the Minister on the need to revise or develop norms and standards for quality and safety for the entire health system; certify compliance with the prescribed norms and standards; monitor and inspect health establishments; and deal with complaints against the entire health system. The bill aims to ensure that the quality of health provided to the population of South Africa is of the highest standard both in the private and public sectors.The following appointments were approved:For enquiries, please contact:Vusi Mona Cell: 078 021 4035Issued by Government Communications (GCIS) top