5 August 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Pretoria on 4 August 2010. Cabinet noted the progress the country was making in the fight against attacks on foreign nationals. The incidents of violence and looting of property reported thus far points to criminality more than xenophobia. Violence and destruction of property against anyone is crime and government will ensure that anyone who advocates for or participates in violent activities against foreigners will be apprehended. Government takes any threat of violence, whether perceived or real, very seriously and our security forces will not hesitate to take action against the perpetrators of any kind of violence. All South Africans have the responsibility to co-operate with the law enforcement agencies to ensure that the country continues to be safe for all who live within our borders. Anyone found to be involved in planning or attacking foreign nationals must expect to face the full might of the law. The Inter-Ministerial Committee will continue to monitor the situation to ensure that no further incidents or threats of violence take place. Government calls on South Africans to join hands and say No to xenophobia, No to violence . The meeting noted that the delivery agreements are in the process of being finalised and will be signed by President Zuma and the coordinating Ministers by the end of September 2010. These agreements will constitute the new government Programme of Action which will be published on the government website. GCIS will schedule media briefings to enable the coordinating Ministers to present the agreements to the public and the media. The meeting called on all South Africans to celebrate the achievements of women during August, which has been declared Women s Month. This year marks the 54th anniversary of the women s anti-pass march and serves to remind South Africans about women s struggle for equal rights. The theme for this year s celebrations is Working Together for Equal Opportunities and Progress for all Women and the slogan is Forward to the Decade of African Women . President Jacob Zuma will address the main event that will take place at the ABSA stadium in East London on 9 August 2010. Cabinet condemned the cold-blooded murder of two toddlers and the merciless killing of their mother. Cabinet expressed its condolences to the family and friends of the Mashao family for their tragic loss on the eve of Women s month. Those responsible must be brought to book. Cabinet also conveyed its heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of the 22 elderly people who died in a fire at an old age home in Ekurhuleni on Sunday night. The decision by the Department of Social Development to inspect all old age homes is welcomed. The meeting also paid tribute to the late Ms Cheryl Gillwald, the former Deputy Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, who passed away on 22 July 2010. A memorial service will be held on Friday 6 August 2010 at the Roedean School in Parktown. Cabinet congratulated the Grannies from Limpopo who participated in the Vetarens Cup that took place in the US in July. The team is made up of 35 women who are aged from 50-84. The proposal for South Africa to co-host the African Changing Diabetes Leadership Forum scheduled from 30 September to 01 October 2010 in Johannesburg, Gauteng was approved. The Forum will be hosted in partnership with the World Diabetes Foundation, the International Diabetes Federation and Novo Nordisk. Cabinet approved Cricket South Africa s hosting of the T20 Champions League tournament from 10 to 26 September 2010. Cabinet approved the hosting of the 7th World Forum on Sport, Education and Culture which will take place in Durban from 6 7 December 2010. Cabinet noted progress made on hosting the 5th World Football Championships for Athletes with Intellectual Disability (INAS-FID) on 23 August to 11 September 2010 in the Limpopo province. The following bills were approved for submission to Parliament: This Bill amends specific provisions of the South African Schools Act 1996, the Employment of Educators Act 1998; the South African Council for Educators Act 2000; and the General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance Act 2001.The following appointments were approved: Enquiries: Themba Maseko Contact: 083 645 0810 Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)top