2 March 2010The President has declared this year, The Year of Action. The mandate of the cluster is very clear, grow the economy and create jobs. We recognize that there are structural constraints which have skewed the development trajectory of the country. These include: We are ready to attend to these structural constraints and have determined that there are areas where we can stimulate real growth to ensure job creation. Our response forms the basis of what we call a new growth path which we are still working to further refine. We have, as a beginning, identified areas where we believe there is real potential. For immediate action, these were considered by the January 2010 Cabinet Lekgotla to constitute a new growth path. They are the following: The Cluster will also continue to implement initiatives to reduce the cost of retail communication services by 30% to enhance ICT application in business development and domestic use. Both the Electronics Communications and ICASA Act will be amended to support this objective. In addition the local manufacture of set top boxes will be promoted. Already government is supporting clean energy research at a number of universities, has invested in an electric car, and is soon to launch the prototype of an e-bike. Last December, Pierre Terblanche, the world famous South African-born designer of leading motorbikes, began to design a South African hybrid electric bike. The Systems Integration Centre of Competence from the DST s Hydrogen Programme is currently - together with the Tshwane University of Technology-based Institute for Advanced Tooling - working on the power system for the bike. By July 2010 the Cluster will finalise a green economy plan to be presented to Cabinet. We intend to integrate and support mainstream economic activities. The successes in the pilot programme show us that we are on the right track to transform rural economies and livelihoods. We will scale up the Comprehensive Rural Development programme to include over 150 wards across the country. A Job Creation Model has been developed to ensure that one person per participating household is trained and placed on two year employment contract. As part of the contract, each person employed will contribute at least 50% of the income to the household. Key to this will be creating an enabling environment through construction and rehabilitation of economic infrastructure like agriparks, road networks and access to ICT; We will be organising communities into cooperatives and establishment of small enterprises. In addition, resuscitation plans will be developed for farms under distress, which government acquired through land distribution and restitution since 1994. The plans will include on-off farm infrastructure, mechanisation, skills training and extension support and other much needed operational inputs, through various strategies such as mentoring, co-management and share equity. This investment is vital in ensuring that these farms produce much needed food and incomes for land reform beneficiaries, their families and society as a whole. Support will also be provided to black farmers who are indebted to the Land Bank and face the prospect of losing their farms, thereby rolling back the limited gains we have made in land redistribution. A review of the Land Tenure Systems Reform, to bring about a more effective system of land tenure will be undertaken. The tourism sector is an essential contributor to GDP growth, creation of decent work and job opportunities. The World Cup is a test of our organizing ability and tourism infrastructure. The intention is to increase the number of domestic and international tourist. The diversification of the sector is expected to realize new rural based products by 2014 /15 as well as the development of new niche products. The cluster will coordinate work in other areas in order to deliver decent jobs and inclusive and diversified economic growth. Particularly regardingConclusionThe budget tabled by Minister Gordhan indicates a strong commitment to government s priorities which we have outlined above. The current economic context and growth trajectory necessitate that we expand our interventions to deal with the structural constraints which have inhibited the economy from producing the employment and poverty reduction outcomes that we expect. The key priority for the Cluster is therefore to restructure the economy and set it on an employment and growth generating path. We are going to examine other opportunities which we believe the economic sectors for positive employment outcomes these includes, mining, mineral beneficiation and support for agriculture. The Cluster intends to finalise all elements of this Growth Path for consideration by Cabinet during its mid-year Cabinet Lekgotla.Enquiries: Bongiwe Gambu Cell: 082 714 9463 Issued by: GCIS on behalf of the Economic sectors &amp; employment cluster top