22 April 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 21 April 2010. As the country celebrated the 50-day countdown to the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the Minister of Sport and Recreation tabled a progress report on the tournament beginning on the 11 June which confirmed that it is all systems go. All the stadia are ready and are in the process of being handed over to the host cities well ahead of the FIFA requirement that the stadia be handed over to them 15 days before the start of what could be the most defining moment for our country and continent. The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs has developed and finalised the 2010 Disaster Management Plan in partnership with the National Disaster Management Centre. Simulation exercises are being conducted to test the effectiveness of the plans. The ticket frenzy that greeted the last phase of ticket sales was the clearest evidence yet that South Africans are indeed ready and excited about the World Cup. Mass mobilisation efforts such as the Football Friday, Fly the flag, road shows and the countdown campaigns are having the desired impact of inspiring South Africans to embrace the biggest show on earth. Millions of South Africans are flying the national flag from their cars and wearing the Bafana Bafana and other football shirts as a sign of their readiness to welcome the world during the World Cup. The Department of Sport and Recreation is putting up billboards throughout the country and flighting adverts on various radio and TV stations to raise awareness and get increasing numbers of South Africans excited about the World Cup. President Jacob Zuma officially opened the newly revamped international terminal at the OR Tambo International Airport on 21 April 2010. King Shaka International Airport will be officially opened on 1 May 2010. These two airports, as well as the Gauteng Rapid Rail link, amongst others, form part of the 2010 FIFA World Cup Legacy project and will give impetus to the integrated transport infrastructure solution for the country. Government confirms without equivocation that South Africa is ready to host the world on the southern tip of Africa! Ke nako! South Africans have further reason for optimism as the country commemorates 16 years of freedom on the 27th April 2010. The national celebration will take place at the Union Buildings although South Africans throughout the country will have an opportunity to reflect on the road we have travelled to build a united, non-racial, non-sexist nation. The thousands of South Africans who made the ultimate sacrifice of their lives to ensure freedom for all will be remembered and honoured. It will also be a time to remember that nation building requires every South African, young and old, to recognise and live by the principles enshrined in the constitution and desist from behaviour that may erode the legacy of those who have come before us, as well as the hard won social cohesion we have thus far forged. The President will conclude the day by conferring National Orders on numerous South Africans and other international citizens who have distinguished themselves by contributing to democracy and freedom in South Africa and the world. President Zuma will honour those who have served South Africa in various forms, including Mr Sepp Blatter, for his exceptional contribution to the field of football, particularly for supporting South Africa s hosting of the FIFA World Cup on the African continent. President Jacob Zuma will launch the implementation plan to scale up Government s HIV and AIDS prevention and treatment programme on Sunday 25th April 2010. The President announced on World AIDS Day on 1 December 2009 that the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic would be scaled up in partnership with all stakeholders in the South African National AIDS Council (SANAC). The objectives of the new scaled up plan are to reduce the rate of infection by 50% by 2011 and to provide ARV treatment to 80% of those who need the treatment. The highlights of the new implementation plan will include voluntary and public HIV/AIDS testing which will be led by members of Cabinet and other leaders from broader society; and a move from voluntary counselling and testing (VCT) to HIV Counselling and Testing (HCT). The target of the HCT campaign is to test up to 15 million people by June 2011, in line with the President s call that every South African should know his/her status. The campaign will also promote healthy lifestyles and increase access to treatment, care and support. Members of Cabinet will attend the provincial launches of the campaign. Although Government welcomes the end of the strike by municipal workers following the signing of the agreement between the union and employer representatives, government condemns the continued trashing of our cities. This is totally unacceptable. The destruction of property and throwing of rubbish in the streets will never be an acceptable way of highlighting their grievances. Union leaders are urged to educate their members about the need for protesters to conduct themselves in a mature and measured manner and to lead by example to all South Africans. Cabinet approved the amendment of the policy direction to the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) to establish a licensing framework for Broadband Infraco (Pty) Ltd. The original policy direction to ICASA was issued in terms of Section 4 (1) of the Broadband Infraco Act instead of Section 3 (10) (A) of the Electronic Communications Act (36 of 2005). The direction will enable ICASA to accept and consider Broadband Infraco s licensing application to provide electronic communications network services (ECNS). The meeting observed a moment of silence for the late Dr Molefe Sefularo, former Deputy Minister of Health, who passed away in a tragic car accident at the beginning of the month. Marking 100 days after the devastating earthquake that hit Haiti, the Minister of Arts and Culture announced that South African artists have launched a campaign to raise funds for Haiti as a show of solidarity with the people of that country. The meeting noted that President Jacob Zuma would be launching the 1 million solar geysers campaign on the 28th April 2010 in Winterveld. This launch will constitute a milestone as the country moves towards renewable energy generation. On the 26th April, South Africa will be hosting a meeting of Ministers of Environment from Brazil, India and China to chart the way forward on climate change following the Copenhagen Summit, which was held in December 2009. The following appointments were approved: The Deeds Registry Amendment Bill was approved for submission to Parliament.Enquiries: Themba Maseko Contact: 083 645 0810 Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)top