20 July 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Pretoria on 20 July 2010. Cabinet welcomed the groundbreaking news that a study that was jointly funded by the South African and United States Governments had established that an antiretroviral microbicide reduces the rate of HIV and Herpes infections in women by 40% and 51 % respectively. The microbicide will arm women to protect themselves against infections. The study was conducted by the Centre for AIDS Programme of Research (CAPRISA) in Durban in partnership with associates from the Columbia University in the United States. Sexual transmission of HIV is the most common way that HIV is spread and accounts for about 85 % of all HIV infections globally. A key driver of HIV infection in Southern Africa is the high rate of new HIV infection among young women and reducing new infections in this category is key to altering the HIV epidemic in the region. Cabinet noted that the results of the study were announced at the AIDS conference in Vienna today and also published in the prestigious peer-reviewed journal of science this week. Although the results still need to be confirmed by other studies which will be initiated urgently to enable licensure and subsequent public availability for HIV prevention, Cabinet welcomed the fact that the gel will be manufactured in South Africa for distribution in South Africa, the region and the rest of the world. Cabinet approved the reactivation of the Programme of Action (PoA) on the government website as a summary of strategic focus areas of government and as a means of reporting progress to the public. The new PoA will allow the public to view progress on the implementation of the government Programme of Action. The South African Trade Policy and Strategy Framework (TPSF) was approved. The TPSF sets out, among other things, the following: a framework for trade policy that supports the objectives of the National Industrial Policy Framework (NIPF); outlines the contribution trade policy should make to advancing industrial development; the need for upgrading and diversification along a growth path that addresses structural constraints in the economy, including unemployment and poverty; and outlines the key principles of South Africa s international trade engagements at bilateral, regional and multilateral trade levels. The Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) policy framework was approved. This framework provides the basis on which BIT s could be evaluated and renegotiated. The Minister of Trade and Industry will convene an Inter-Ministerial Committee comprising of Ministers of International Relations and Cooperation, of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, of Economic Development and of Finance to oversee all matters pertaining to BITs. The Minister of Trade and Industry will also initiate a process to draft legislation in this regard. Cabinet supported the bid by the South African Transplant Sports Association to host the first World Transplant Games on the African continent. The games are scheduled to be held from 27 July to 4 August 2013 in Durban. Cabinet endorsed South Africa s cities will bid to host the 2013 World Conference on Doping in Sport. Letters have been written to Mayors requesting them to submit bids to host the conference. Cabinet approved the amendments to articles VI and XIV. A of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The amendments will be submitted to Parliament for ratification. The following bills were approved: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill, 2010 Rental Housing Amendment Bill, 2010 The Bill gives effect to the International Convention for Safe Containers, 1972 ( the Convention ). The Convention has two principal objectives which are to maintain a high level safety of human life in transport and handling of containers by providing generally acceptable test procedures and related strength requirements which have proven adequate over the years; and to facilitate international transport of containers by providing uniform international safety regulations, equally applicable to all modes of surface transport. The Refugee Amendment Bill, 2010. The immigration Amendment Bill, 2010 The following appointments were approved: Enquiries: Themba Maseko Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)top