20 May 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 19 May 2010. Cabinet noted that the negotiations between the unions, PRASA and Transnet were at an advanced stage. Cabinet expressed the hope that the parties would do their best to reach a settlement sooner rather than later to avoid the huge cost to the economy and the untold inconvenience to commuters. The meeting noted that although there was nothing untoward with the number of labour negotiations taking place in the different sectors of the economy, as this is the season of negotiations , Cabinet expressed the hope that all parties would ensure that negotiations are concluded speedily. While negotiations and strikes are an important part of democracy, government finds the violence that has accompanied some of the strikes in the past totally unacceptable. A draft National Tourism Sector Strategy (NTSS) was approved. The draft strategy will serve as a framework for sustainable tourism growth and development in South Africa for the next five years. The strategy will be published shortly for public comment. The report of the National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC) covering the period July 2009-February 2010 was tabled and endorsed. The report will be submitted to Parliament shortly and published thereafter. Cabinet noted that the Green Economy Summit was taking place at the Sandton Convention Centre on 18-20 May 2010 under the theme towards a resource efficient, low carbon and pro-employment growth plan . The summit has provided a platform to elevate government s commitment and practical implementation of a consensus on the green economy path. Cabinet supported South Africa s bid to host the XIVth World Forestry Congress in 2015. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries will prepare the bid in consultation with the Minister of Tourism. Cabinet noted that South Africa would participate in the Review Conference of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to be held in Kampala, Uganda from 31 May 2010 to 11 June 2010. Further amendments to the Constitutional Amendment Bill [PDF] and the Superior Courts Bill were approved. These new amendments were omitted from the Bills that were approved at the last Cabinet meeting. The first amendment is to section 176 of the Constitutional Amendment Bill and it provides for the harmonisation of the terms of office of a judge of the Constitutional Court with that of judges of other Superior Courts. The second amendment is the inclusion of section 61 (2) in the Superior Courts Bill. This new clause provides security of tenure to the judges of the Labour Court who are not judges of the High Court for the fixed period for which they have been appointed by the President. The Sectional Titles Amendment Bill was approved and will be tabled in Parliament shortly. The following appointments were approved: Reappointments: Prof MJ Kahn; Mr JH Bain; Ms I Wilken and Ms A Young New appointments: Mr J Godden; Prof T Mayekiso; Prof T Mofokeng; Prof M Karaan; Ms J Chitja; Ms D Msomi; Prof SV Nkomo; Ms OD Aphane; Ms W Van Rijseen; Mr M Sirenya; Mr M Dyasi and Prof F Swanepoel. Enquiries: Themba Maseko Contact: 083 645 0810 Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)top