13 October 2010Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town today, 13 October 2010. Cabinet welcomed South Africa s election as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) in New York yesterday. This election indicates the UN s confidence in South Africa as a global player and is the outcome of many years of hard work by this government to ensure that the developing world has a strong voice in the UNSC. We will use our position in the Security Council to advance the African agenda, world peace and security across the globe. Cabinet congratulated the Chilean authorities and Murray and Roberts for rescuing the miners who were trapped underground for more than two months. The resilience of the miners, the unwavering commitment, resilience and perseverance of all involved in the rescue effort deserves praise from everyone around the world. This rescue effort is commendable and should set a new standard of extra-ordinary measures that need to be taken to save the lives of those in distress throughout the world. Murray and Roberts has made all South Africans proud by leading the rescue effort that has saved the lives of the miners. Cabinet wishes all our learners, particularly, the matric class of 2010, the best of luck in the forthcoming end of the year examinations. Government understands that 2010 has been a difficult year for our youth, particularly due to the public sector strike that led to the loss of three weeks of learning. We appeal to teachers and parents to do all they can to support our learners to do well in the examinations. Cabinet congratulates all our athletes for doing superbly well at the 2010 Delhi Commonwealth Games. They have made all South Africans proud by performing like true champions and bringing so many medals home. You have inspired millions of our youth to also strive to become champions. The Athletics authorities also deserve praise for doing everything possible to prepare our athletes for the games. Well done Athletics SA. Government also takes the opportunity to congratulate the government and the people of India for overcoming challenges and making sure that the games were a great success. The year 2010 will be remembered as a year in which South Africa, and India, our IBSA partner, demonstrated that developing Nations are capable of organising successful global sporting events. Well-done India. Cabinet condemns the poaching of more than 200 rhinos in parts of the country. These killings are posing a threat to the strides the country has made in rhino conservation over the years. We welcome the arrest and prosecution of the criminals who are implicated in this act of thuggery and cruelty against the rhinos. Government calls on all South Africans to be vigilant and to cooperate with the law enforcement authorities to ensure that all those who are implicated in the poaching are brought to book as soon as possible. Government supports all efforts by civil society, such as LeadSA, to raise awareness about this scourge, as we believe that all South Africans have a role to play fighting the rhino poachers. Cabinet noted that Statistics South Africa is getting ready to embark on the largest census campaign ever conducted in this country. The census will provide the most comprehensive picture of South African society in the post-apartheid era. More than 120 000 fieldworkers will be employed to cover 14 million households throughout the country. A public awareness campaign is already underway and the public are urged to participate in the census to ensure that accurate data is received about the state of the country to improve planning and better resource allocation. The meeting was also joined by Premiers and MECs for Finance to receive a briefing from the Minister of Finance, Pravin Gordhan, on the Mid-term Budget and Division of Revenue Amendment Bill which will be tabled in Parliament on 27 October 2010. This part of the meeting was also addressed by the Auditor General on the audit outcomes for the 2009/2010 financial year. The meeting noted that South Africa s international agenda will be further profiled when President Jacob Zuma conducts an official State visit to Egypt from 19 to 20 October 2010. The visit will strengthen bilateral and trade relations between the two countries. The meeting noted that Mr Kgalema Motlanthe, the Deputy President, would lead a government delegation of Ministers and Deputy Ministers to meet with the South African National Editors Forum on 15 and 16 October 2010 in Johannesburg. This meeting is expected to address a number of issues including the Protection of Information Bill, Section 205 of the Criminal Procedure Act, and the relations between government and the media in general. A media briefing will take place at the end of the meeting on Saturday afternoon. For enquiries, please contact: Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by Government Communications (GCIS)top